I bow to all the seekers of truth.
You are here
to feel the truth.
And not to
just conceptualise it mentally.
Now, there’s a question yesterday, people asked
that what is the difference
between Sahaja Yoga and other yogas.
All these yogas
have been written down by
a saint called Patanjali, long time back.
And he called it Ashtanga Yoga,
Ashtanga, with eight facets.
He existed thousands of years back,
and that time we had a system in which
the students went into the university
to study under some enlightened soul,
a guru, satguru.
So, there are eight facets
of the Yoga, mean union with the divine.
So, he has got,
the first one as yama.
Yama Niyama. Yama is the first one
in which he has written
what we have to do
to make our breathing all right
or to control our misbehaviour.
So, one-third of that
is the asanas
where you do physical exercises for a particular
type of problem.
But that is not
Hatha Yoga. Hatha Yoga
is a complete Patajali Yoga Shastra,
Yoga – that is complete Patanjali Yoga scripture.
Asanas or these
practices of physical exercises
is a very wee bit, is one one-twenty fourth
of one of them.
‘Ha’ and ‘Tha’,
Ha means the sun
and Tha means the moon.
So both are
considered in Hatha Yoga.
Because we are not only physical beings.
We are physical being,
we are mental being,
we are emotional being, we are spiritual being.
So only to keep your physical being
is not so important.
One has to
understand that
all these things were done by a realised soul
who knew what
asanas are to be used, what physical exercises are
to be used for a particular person.
But some of the people who went to the
gurus in Himalayas,
and they were very greedy people, not good
for any kind of yoga.
So, the gurus told them
that you’d better do physical exercises,
just to get rid of them.
So they came down
and they started teaching all these acrobats.
But such a craze now that
people don’t know what are the
side effects of this kind of
imbalanced behaviour.
The right side if you use too much,
the left side is completely neglected.
So such people become very dry
by nature, there is no love, no compassion.
They become very hot-tempered
and they try
to get angry at the slightest pretext.
Sometimes are so hot-tempered that
you have to go near them with a barge pole in between, you see.
They become horrid fathers or mothers,
and always fight with each other
and mostly end up with divorces.
And the women who do too much of this Hatha yoga
cannot even produce children.
They become so dominating that
it is difficult to make out whether they are a
man, or a woman, or a tiger.
So –
but in the Patanjali Yoga Shastra,
it is described
those physical exercises required for physical correction
of your spinal cord.
So, when the Kundalini rises,
you see the problem on what centre it is,
and you try to
try to improve
that particular chakras.
For example, if your this centre is catching, Agnya,
then you have to say ‘I forgive everyone’,
otherwise it won’t open at any cost.
So, unless and until
the Kundalini moves,
how will you know what’s the blockade?
And then, how will you know
what Asana is to be done or not to be done.
So, it is like taking all the medicines from the medicine box
thinking you are very sick.
So, it is so indiscriminate.
Now, the second one is Raja Yoga
where it is said that you have to
know that when the Kundalini rises
there are certain places like valves on the centres.
They stop the Kundalini from
falling down.
Now, when the
Kundalini rises just like the
car starts, gets ignited,
all the machinery starts working automatically.
Also, the tongue is a little bit
pulled inside which you don’t feel, but it is pulled inside a little bit.
Because the Kundalini should not fall down
from this centre.
But today’s
horrible this Raja yoga is
that they cut the thread of the
tongue and the tongue wags like a dog’s tongue,
you can’t talk, you can’t eat.
This is to put the tongue back.
For what are you putting, there is no Kundalini, what are you stopping there?
That automatic action is called as Khechari
and these people are artificially doing it.
I have seen many people in Los Angeles, old people
whom I knew also, having that kind of a tongue.
So they teach
they teach you to hold your stomach, to hold here,
but there is no Kundalini, what are you holding?
When the car has not started what is the use of putting the choke
or taking out a wheel and moving it?
It is so artificial.
Then somebody has asked me
– this is they call as akriya,
Kriya yoga.
But Sahaja Yoga is a-kriya. Kriya means action,
what action can you do to raise the Kundalini?
If you have to sprout the seed,
what action do you take?
You just put the seed in the mother earth. Finished.
Now you open the seed, take out the primule
and push it back, do you think,
do you think it will sprout?
This is how so many
beautiful seekers are harmed.
There are so many like that.
Funny, funny things.
Like they just talk, talk, talk, talk, talk.
Big lectures, big, big books,
talking of big, big, things.
Because you people have not heard of these words,
they go on writing all kinds
of nonsense and you have to digest it.
There are all types of people
who are telling you, “Take the name of somebody,
go on chanting something”.
Or they say that you read this book,
read that book.
How many books did Christ read?
Think of it, this kind of stupidity they
are spreading all over.
And you have to use your brains.
The other day I met a person
who had made a little book of Gita in gold and put it here.
And he said his guru is selling this
and that now he is in the heavens,
just imaginary.
But it is said about all this falsehood,
has been written down by so many saints.
Guru Nanaka has said that,
“The one who meets you, God,
is the only Satguru, is the only guru”.
So, all these funny ideas
that are written down or have been told to you,
given lectures,
are all to be understood in one way,
that: “What have you got out of it?”.
Like somebody said he has got a diamond.
But diamond you can get in the market!
All right.
And he himself is a heart patient.
And he came to me for curing himself.
So, I told him, first of all, give up this
diamond to some poor man, then come to me.
Then there are other types also, who mesmerise you.
But they have no knowledge, nothing.
Just they get mesmerized
and they said we had an experience.
But they have no knowledge as to what has happened,
what is within you,
how to work it out, nothing.
Only what they feel
that, “Oh, something has happened to us”.
Also, don’t know what has happened to them.
So with this kind of
your understanding,
you are definitely going to get lost.
You have to know that
anybody who takes money from you,
for giving you realisation or anything,
is a false person.
It’s all right, they can pay for the hall,
or they can pay for the aeroplane,
but you cannot pay for Self-realisation.
Then third thing you must see
what is happening to the disciples.
Now disciples have become like mad people,
some are in the lunatic asylum,
some are begging,
some are
aggressive, violent people.
Such people, how can they be spiritual?
There is no knowledge, there is no love, there is no compassion.
So, what’s the use of wasting your energy
with something so nonsensical, because
you have never known it before?
Anything new should not be accepted
blindfolded.
But we should, first of all,
understand it
in our full awareness
and then we should accept.
Of course,
the mesmerism is very
easy because you can mesmerise thousands of people.
But to create
really knowledgeable, dynamic,
compassionate, effective
and powerful people is very difficult.
After Sahaja Yoga,
you will see that you become extremely powerful.
And you’ll know what power you have.
And you’ll know that this is the power
of love.
You all the time feel the bliss of God.
And every time you can find out
whether it is truth or not.
So when you get your realisation,
then first you feel the cool breeze
of the Holy Ghost for the first time,
and on your fingertips you can feel
the centres that are yours and the centres of others.
Also, you know how to use it.
You can see here there are some English,
some Italians,
from all over the world, people are singing
Sanskrit songs.
Sanskrit is the most difficult language,
worse than even Latin.
And even to speak
Hindi by these people is a difficult thing.
And the speed with which they sing,
even an Indian can’t do it.
Even the Swiss are doing that, Swiss! Who were so...
And the English!
Which is a miracle!
And you can’t make them out
who is English and who is a German.
We have many Jews who worship Christ.
And we have many Muslims who worship Rama.
The other day I saw one Irani and Iraqi
just hugging each other and
being very friendly. Iraqi and Irani.
What a brotherhood they enjoy.
Because they have become collectively conscious.
All this is described in Patanjali.
First, he says,
is here is thoughtless awareness which he calls
in Sanskrit language as Nirvichara Samadhi.
And then here he calls it
as doubtless awareness,
which we call as Nirvikalpa Samadhi.
And this all-pervading power
he calls as Ruthambara Pragnya.
Ruthambara Pragnya.
See, that’s Italian.
So,
it’s a force within you,
it’s a force already within you, it’s your own.
And is your own individual mother, this Kundalini is.
And you can feel it with a stethoscope,
in some people when it moves slowly,
till it reaches here on top of your head,
you can feel the throbbing,
till it breaks.
And then you feel the cool breeze from your own head coming out.
You feel very relaxed and peaceful.
You feel the cool breeze all on your fingertips.
Within a month’s time, you become a master.
You can give realisation to others.
You can cure others.
And you become a very dynamic
peaceful personality.
Your face starts glowing.
Your age drops ten years at least.
There’s a glint in your eye.
And you are a saint!
You become a very sane innocent person.
And the whole life becomes a real fun.
You are so relaxed that every day it’s a holiday.
With all the dynamism, you are extremely relaxed.
They told me that the whole of Italy is on holiday.
They have all gone to Spain
and all the Spanish have come here.
So I said “All right, I will give realisation to Spanish in Italy”.
And then, after the holiday they are exhausted,
so they need another holiday to get over the exhaustion.
So, you just start enjoying everything,
every bit of your life, every moment.
Because your Spirit is the source of joy.
It is the source
which gives you the truth.
Ask any question, and
if it is yes, you get cool breeze.
If it is no, you get heat.
And you get answer to everything.
It’s so remarkable, it’s so great, that I cannot tell you
how many miracles take place in your life.
It is for you to enter into the Kingdom of God
and see for yourself how beautiful it is to be there.
So now we will have the
Realisation process.
There were some questions,
which I have answered.
Now, he says that
once he felt on the right hand
the heat, and in the right…
No. On the left hand he felt the heat,
and on the head he felt the cool. No,
just the other way round. What did you feel.
“In the right hand on the fontanel area
I feel some heat, and cool on the right”.
Right what, right hand?
Yogi: Right hand.
Shri Mataji: All right, right hand.
Now. He says, on the right hand he feels cool
and on the head he feels the hot. All right. What is the reason?
That in the head there is still heat.
Up to this point is cooled down, but the head is to be cleared out.
For that you just have to ask the Mother Kundalini:
“Mother Kundalini, come in my head”. That’s all.
And
another question is also very sweet. That:
“I believe you are my Mother,
but do you believe I’m your son?”.
And very lovingly he says that,
“When You go away to India,
then what will I do here?”.
Of course, you are my son
and I’ll be always with you, whether in India or here.
Now let us have our
realisation.
Is the best way to do it.
If you could – those people who are sitting down,
can sit now on the chairs, some people have left.
All the Indians have left,
because they have come here to make money, that’s all.
Thank God.
Ask the Indians to sit at the back, always.
I say Hindustani. That’s what Indians are.
So ask Indians to sit at the back, always.
Useless people.
Those who are abroad.
In India there are thousands, twelve thousand
people coming to my programme, not one person moves!
The Indians here are…
I don’t know how they are here.
Then should go back.
- useless. But what I think they disturb us,
they sit in the first seat and they go away.
There are some seats here.
There are some seats if you want, you can come here.
Come along here; if you want there are some seats here also,
in the front row.
Those who want to sit can come.
Yes, yes, if you want to sit please sit down.
Be comfortable.
Come, come, sit.
Now, it’s a very simple method.
Sahaja means simple,
and we’ll work it out in no time.
It will hardly take about ten minutes,
just ten minutes it will take.
First I will show you
how to nourish our centres
and then you’ll have to close your eyes.
So I have to request you to take out your shoes
because this Mother Earth also helps us a lot.
There’s a seat here. If you want you can sit here, there’s a seat
for you.
Here. There’s a seat here.
And a seat there too, behind. Come along.
All right, better you sit. Good.
So,
now,
both the feet are to be kept apart from each other
because there are two energies, left and right.
You have to put the left hand
like this,
symbolising your desire, because this is the power of desire,
desire to get Self-realisation.
Now, right hand is to be used on the left-hand side
of your body
to nourish the centres, because it’s the power of action.
As we had – yesterday I told you
that there are two conditions.
One condition is
that you have to forgive yourself, forget the past.
Just forget the past.
You have to be very pleasantly placed towards yourself.
Forgive yourself.
Don’t feel guilty.
Not to feel guilty at all.
The second one is that
you have to forgive everyone.
If you do not forgive everyone,
then there will be a problem on this centre
and the Kundalini won’t rise.
So please forgive everyone
from your heart,
because if you forgive or don’t forgive,
you don’t do anything, it’s a myth.
But if you don’t forgive,
then you are playing into wrong hands.
Now, please
put your left hand towards Me like this.
All of you have to do it.
Those who don’t want to do it should go away,
they should not watch other people,
it’s not civil.
All right. So, now, please put your left hand towards Me,
and right hand on your heart.
Here, now,
resides
you should know
the Spirit.
So if you are the Spirit
you are your guide.
So now
you have to put your hand
in the upper portion of your abdomen,
on the left-hand side.
Here is the centre
of your mastery.
So if you are the Spirit
you become the Master.
Then take down your hand
in the lower portion of your abdomen,
on the left-hand side.
This is the centre of pure knowledge.
This pure knowledge
manifests through your central nervous system.
It is not a mental knowledge
but a divine knowledge,
by which you know
what is the truth.
You also know the divine laws:
a new science I would say,
of Divinity.
Now you have to raise your hand
in the upper portion of your abdomen again.
Then on your heart,
and then in the corner of your neck
and your shoulder.
And turn your head to your right as much as you can.
This is the centre
which is blocked when you feel guilty,
which is a very dangerous thing;
you get spondylitis,
angina, many diseases because of this.
Now we put our hand
on our forehead across
and bend our head,
make it rest on your hand,
and press it hard on both the sides.
This is the centre where you forgive others.
Now you take back your hand
on the backside of your head
and push back your head on it,
as much as you can.
This is the centre where you have to ask for forgiveness
from the Divine without feeling guilty,
without counting your mistakes.
Now stretch your hand,
stretch it nicely, and put the centre
of your palm on top of the fontanel bone area,
which was the soft bone in your childhood.
Push back your fingers,
push back your fingers, put a nice pressure
on the fontanel bone
and move your scalp
seven times clockwise,
very slowly.
That’s all you have to do.
All right, take down your hands now.
Now you have to close your eyes
and not to open them,
till I tell you.
Please put the left hand towards me,
and both feet apart from each other.
Put the right hand on your heart
and close your eyes.
Here, you have to ask me
a question three times,
which is very important
– you can call me Shri Mataji
or Mother, whatever suits you –
“Mother, am I the Spirit?”
Ask this three times.
Now, if you are the Spirit,
then you are your own master,
so please take your right hand
in the lower part
in the upper part of your abdomen and press it hard.
Here you ask me a question,
again three times:
“Mother, am I my own Master?”
Three times.
I have already told you
that I respect your freedom
and I cannot
force pure knowledge on you.
You have to ask for it.
So now, you put
your right hand in the lower portion of your abdomen.
Press it hard
and six times please say:
“Mother,
please give me pure knowledge”,
because this
chakra, this centre, has got six petals.
Now,
as soon as you say
you want pure knowledge, the Kundalini starts rising.
So we have to clear
the upper centres by nourishing it with our
self-confidence.
So now raise your hand
onto the upper portion of your abdomen
on the left-hand side and press it hard.
This is the centre of your mastery.
So to open the centre
you please say with full confidence, ten times:
“Mother, I am my own Master”.
Now, we have to know that
we are not this body, we are not this mind,
we are not these emotions,
and we are not this intellect.
We are not our conditionings, we are not our ego,
but we are pure Spirit.
So raise your right hand on your heart,
and say with full confidence, twelve times:
“Mother, I am the Spirit”,
which is the greatest truth about yourself.
Now, we have to know that
the all-pervading power
of Divine Love
is the ocean of compassion
and love.
It is the ocean of
bliss and joy.
Above all,
it is the ocean of forgiveness.
So whatever mistakes you commit
can be easily dissolved by this ocean.
So now,
please be happy with yourself, forgive yourself,
and put your right hand
on your - in your corner
of shoulder and your head, quite
at the back, pushing it on the backside,
and turn your head to your right.
Here you have to say
with full confidence in yourself,
sixteen times:
“Mother, I am not guilty at all.”
I have already told you that
to forgive or not to forgive,
you don’t do anything,
it is a myth.
But if you don’t forgive, then you play into wrong hands.
So now
you raise your right hand
on your forehead
and put your head down on it
as far as you can,
and press it on both the sides,
and here you have to say:
“Mother, I forgive everyone.”
Say it from your heart.
Now take back your hand,
and push it
onto the backside of your head
and put back your head slowly.
Here now,
without counting your mistakes,
without feeling guilty,
for your own satisfaction
you have to say:
“Oh Divine, if I have done any mistakes,
please forgive me.”
Now stretch your hand fully
and put your
centre of your palm
on top of your head, on the fontanel bone area,
which is a soft bone, and put down your head.
And now you have to move
your scalp seven times
very slowly, clockwise.
Put down your head.
But here again, I cannot force
on you Self-realisation,
you have to ask.
So you have to say while moving your hand:
“Shri Mataji, please
give me my Self-realisation.”
Seven times.
[Shri Mataji blows through the microphone]
Take down your hands please.
And open your hands.
Please put your hands like this. Watch Me without thinking.
Now bend your head
and put your left hand
on top of your head
on the fontanel bone area,
and see for yourself if there is a
cool breeze coming out of your head.
Or may be some heat, doesn’t matter.
Now, put the left hand towards me, and put the head down
and see for yourself if there’s a cool breeze coming
out of your fontanel bone area.
It may be further on, it could be nearer, it depends on.
Now put your right hand towards me
and bend your head again properly,
and see for yourself if there’s a cool breeze
coming out of your fontanel bone area.
Now, push back your hands
on top of your head like this,
and ask a question,
any one of these three questions:
“Mother, is this the cool breeze of the Holy Ghost?”
“Mother, is this the all-pervading
power of God’s love?’
“Mother, is it Paramachaitanya?”
Ask this question, any one of these, three times.
Now take down your hands please.
All those who have felt
cool breeze in their hands
or out of their heads
please raise both your hands.
Oh, My God.
May God bless you.
Now know that you have touched
this all-pervading power.
Some have not.
Maybe
they were doubting themselves.
Maybe they were not
physically all right
or mentally all right.
Maybe just because they have come only today.
But all of you can get Realisation.
It is your right to get it.
It is the breakthrough of the evolutionary process
to reach this absolute stage.
So now I would request you,
all of you, to come
to the follow-on programme
and to the courses
where you get the knowledge and the love, both,
to understand yourself.
In any case, I would like to meet people
who have got their realisation today.
And those who haven’t got can come here
and it can be worked out.
Just enjoying! Enjoying.